---
layout: post
title: Exemple Markdown
date: 2014-07-15 20:41
author: geoffroy gley
comments: true
categories: [Non classé]
---
<h1>An h1 header</h1>

Paragraphs are separated by a blank line.

2nd paragraph. <em>Italic</em>, <strong>bold</strong>, <code>monospace</code>. Itemized lists
look like:

<ul>
<li>this one</li>
<li>that one</li>
<li>the other one</li>
</ul>

Note that --- not considering the asterisk --- the actual text
content starts at 4-columns in.

<blockquote>
  Block quotes are
  written like so.
  
  They can span multiple paragraphs,
  if you like.
</blockquote>

Use 3 dashes for an em-dash. Use 2 dashes for ranges (ex. "it's all in
chapters 12--14"). Three dots ... will be converted to an ellipsis.

<h2>An h2 header</h2>

Here's a numbered list:

<ol>
<li>first item</li>
<li>second item</li>
<li>third item</li>
</ol>

Note again how the actual text starts at 4 columns in (4 characters
from the left side). Here's a code sample:

<pre><code># Let me re-iterate ...
for i in 1 .. 10 { do-something(i) }
</code></pre>

As you probably guessed, indented 4 spaces. By the way, instead of
indenting the block, you can use delimited blocks, if you like:

[code lang=text]
define foobar() {
    print &quot;Welcome to flavor country!&quot;;
}
[/code]

(which makes copying &amp; pasting easier). You can optionally mark the
delimited block for Pandoc to syntax highlight it:

[code lang=python]
import time
# Quick, count to ten!
for i in range(10):
    # (but not *too* quick)
    time.sleep(0.5)
    print i
[/code]

<h3>An h3 header</h3>

Now a nested list:

<ol>
<li>First, get these ingredients:

<ul>
<li>carrots</li>
<li>celery</li>
<li>lentils</li>
</ul></li>
<li>Boil some water.</p></li>
<li><p>Dump everything in the pot and follow
this algorithm:

<pre><code>find wooden spoon
uncover pot
stir
cover pot
balance wooden spoon precariously on pot handle
wait 10 minutes
goto first step (or shut off burner when done)
</code></pre>

Do not bump wooden spoon or it will fall.</p></li>
</ol>

<p>Notice again how text always lines up on 4-space indents (including
that last line which continues item 3 above). Here's a link to <a href="http://foo.bar">a
website</a>. Here's a link to a <a href="local-doc.html">local
doc</a>. Here's a footnote <sup id="fnref-2554-1"><a href="#fn-2554-1" rel="footnote">1</a></sup>.

Tables can look like this:

size  material      color

<hr />

9     leather       brown
10    hemp canvas   natural
11    glass         transparent

Table: Shoes, their sizes, and what they're made of

(The above is the caption for the table.) Here's a definition list:

<dl>
<dt>apples</dt>
<dd>Good for making applesauce.
oranges</dd>

<dd>Citrus!
tomatoes</dd>

<dd>There's no "e" in tomatoe.</dd>
</dl>

Again, text is indented 4 spaces. (Alternately, put blank lines in
between each of the above definition list lines to spread things
out more.)

Inline math equations go in like so: $\omega = d\phi / dt$. Display
math should get its own line and be put in in double-dollarsigns:

$$I = \int \rho R^{2} dV$$

Done.

<div class="footnotes">
<hr />
<ol>

<li id="fn-2554-1">
Footnote text goes here.&#160;<a href="#fnref-2554-1" rev="footnote">&#8617;</a>
</li>

</ol>
</div>
