---
layout: post
title: 
date: 2018-02-14 19:49
author: cyrille martraire
comments: true
categories: [Non classé]
---
<h1 id="gmail-software-design-is-a-form-of-asset-management">Software design is a form of Asset Management</h1>

Software design is making decisions now that will only be proven good or bad later. These decisions are represented by a collection of lines of code in a codebase.

Asset Management is making decisions now that will only be proven good or bad later. These decisions are represented by a collection of various quantities of financial instruments in a codebase.

<h1 id="gmail-asset-management-is-not-just-for-financial-assets">Asset Management is not just for financial assets</h1>

<blockquote>Asset management, broadly defined, refers to any system that monitors and maintains things of value to an entity or group. (Wikipedia)<span class="gmail-Apple-converted-space"> </span><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asset_management">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asset_management</a></blockquote>

Just by this definition, we see how managing a valuable codebase is in itself a form of asset management. This is not just a metaphor, it really is.

I've been working in asset management (AM for short) several times, for different asset management companies so I have some familiarity with this business domain. And from this familiarity I see a number of interesting similarities between financial asset management and software design.

As I describe asset management in finance, I suggest you compare at the same how this relates to your job doing software design.

<h2 id="gmail-a-codebase-is-a-portfolio">A Codebase is a Portfolio</h2>

The primary concept in asset management in finance is the "portfolio", or "fund". It is a collection of positions on selected financial instruments. For example a portfolio could have some quantity of the IBM stock, some different quantity of a French bond, a larger quantity of some equity index like the CAC40, and a few derivatives to help fine tune the portfolio.

<h2 id="gmail-commits-are-individual-trades">Commits are individual trades</h2>

The job of the asset manager (aka fund manager) is to carefully select what to add and remove to the portfolio. If she wants more IBM, she asks the trader to execute a BUY order on some additional quantity of this stock. If you had 1000 IBM stocks in the portfolio, after you buy 300 more you end up with a position of 1300 IBM stocks.

<h2 id="gmail-skills-matter">Skills matter</h2>

Convenience and familiarity are important. An asset manager not familiar with some kind of financial instrument will be less likely to invest in them, even if it would fit well. That's why many companies have multiple asset managers with different specialities who can help each other. Asset managers are regularly trained. Some instruments that are more dangerous than others require certifications as "licenses to trade".

<h2 id="gmail-the-project-vision-statement-and-its-guidelines-are-the-mandate-of-the-portfolio">The Project Vision Statement and its Guidelines are the Mandate of the portfolio</h2>

The mandate of a portfolio is the set of guidelines and constraints: "aggressive" or "prudent", "no exposition to the tobacco industry", "not allowed to use Credit Default Swaps", or with thresholds on metrics: "sensitivity below 2.5".

This is what we do when we decide on the major framework, main architecture style, implementation guidelines like minimum coverage etc.

<h2 id="gmail-refactoring-tools-also-exist-for-financial-portfolios">Refactoring tools also exist for financial portfolios</h2>

More sophisticated asset management companies have access to more powerful tools (and reduced execution fees), which all can significantly alter the way they manage their portfolio by reducing the friction to make bigger changes. For example, an optimizer can calculate what should be added and removed to/from the portfolio to meet its mandate, taking into account their impacts on all risks and the trading fees. Then the resulting recommendations can be directly sent to trading tools for execution, with no or almost no human intervention. Just like your refactoring tools that can propagate changes everywhere in your codebase.

<h2 id="gmail-innovations-and-shiny-new-technologies">Innovations and shiny new technologies</h2>

Asset managers also like to play with shiny new things that bring obvious benefits, and non-obvious issues later as well, just like developers.

In 2002 I've been curious about how the content of a several-billion euros Money Market fund evolved other its years of history in the system. It was clearly visible that asset managers taste had evolved from investing mostly into Treasuries, then into Repurchase Agreements, then Interest Rate Swaps. If I was looking again today I would increasingly find Cleared Swaps. After the 2008 crisis it has been very clear that sophisticated derivatives have fallen out of fashion; regulation helped in that aspect too, but it wasn't the only reason.

It is like looking at the code of different versions of the same software application: you would find a lot of EJB's in the first generation, then more Spring &amp; Hibernate, JSF, and perhaps nowadays a lot of Netflix libraries.

<h2 id="gmail-not-working-alone">Not working alone</h2>

Finance in general cares a lot about anyone going "rogue" without being able to notice. Therefore the Four-Eye Principle is commonplace: you cannot perform a task totally on your own, someone else had to be involved. In trading, many banks require that traders have to take a minimum of consecutive two-week vacations at least once a year, to make sure that they can be replaced by someone else with the full knowledge of their stuff.

This is reminiscent of pair programming with mandatory pair rotations (<a href="http://www.markhneedham.com/blog/2008/11/04/pair-programming-benefits-of-the-pair-switch-mid-story/">http://www.markhneedham.com/blog/2008/11/04/pair-programming-benefits-of-the-pair-switch-mid-story/</a>), for similar reasons.

But the most fruitful aspect of software design being a form of asset management is about dealing with the obviously unexpected future.

<h1 id="gmail-considering-the-present-along-with-the-future">Considering the present along with the future</h1>

The core skill of the asset manager is to carefully select the investments by considering their expected contribution to the purpose of the portfolio (the mandate), their cost and the risks that come with them.

<h2 id="gmail-value-delivered-is-the-return">Value delivered is the Return</h2>

Obviously, most portfolios focus on getting the maximum return, under the constraints of their mandate. The return is the sum of all the value you get from the asset you have in the portfolio. For example a stock pays dividends, bonds pay coupons, and derivatives pay and receive cashflows.

The return of a line of code is its repeated execution in production, for actual users. If it provides value to someone then it’s and positive return, if it fails to do so, it’s a negative return as it’s a missed opportunity. And if it creates a disaster because of bugs or misunderstandings, then it's a crash.

<h2 id="gmail-change-of-requirements-are-like-market-risks">Change of requirements are like Market Risks</h2>

Asset managers never consider return alone, they care just as much about risks. There are many kinds of risks, but many of them come from the market changing randomly at any time, making your investment not profitable, or not profitable enough (compared to another investment that would have been better). That's a loss of opportunity given our limited resources.

Adding a line of code is like investing on a piece of requirements, and as such it involves some speculation. Speculation has a bad connotation as it is often confused with manipulation (which is illegal), but deciding something without the knowledge of the future is speculation indeed.

There is always some amount of speculation in modifying a part of a codebase since we can never be absolutely certain that the change will actually be useful for users, or that it will actually improve something like the conversion rate. At least with Continuous Delivery we get to know quickly, after a little while in production.

On top of this very short-term speculation, there is a longer run speculation as well: any piece of requirements may change at some point in time, requiring developers to change the code again and again, which has a cost.

<h2 id="gmail-coupling-to-the-requirements">Coupling to the requirements</h2>

Our journey so far suggests a new kind of coupling, the coupling to the expressed requirements. Let's explore the consequences further by analogy with asset management.

<h2 id="gmail-stability-of-requirements-is-like-market-volatility">Stability of requirements is like market Volatility</h2>

The frequency and magnitude of changes of market prices is measured under the name of "volatility". Highly volatile instruments may see their price changing by half in minutes, think options or junk bonds. Low volatility instruments change by less a percent over months, think real estate.

The volatility of an instrument can be measured historically, as statistics on the past history of all price changes, or estimated by gut feeling, or estimated from options markets (more on that later).

The volatility of parts of a codebase can be measured historically by running statistics against the source control history, as Adam Tornhill is doing in his book "Code As A Crime Scene". The volatility of the requirements could perhaps be measured by some smart processing of your change requests over time. But you already estimate the volatilities by gut feeling when doing your software design, even if you are not aware of it.

Dealing with risks in asset management is serious business. It involves measurements, hedging techniques to precisely reduce or increase the risks deliberately, typically using financial options, and stress tests.

<h2 id="gmail-testing-the-future">Testing the future</h2>

A financial portfolio is tested against the future evolution of the markets through simulation, also called "what-if scenarios". This is done with tools, by pretending that the markets and other risks evolve in various ways, e.g. pretending that a company is going bankrupt. For each scenario the value of the portfolio is recalculated to figure out how it behaves.

In software design we tend to think in a similar fashion but without any particular discipline and tooling. We have code katas like "Fruit Shop" (<a href="https://speakerdeck.com/jeanlaurent/fruitshop">https://speakerdeck.com/jeanlaurent/fruitshop</a>) to train ourselves to expect future changes of the requirements.

When discussing design alternatives we try to imagine future changes as a way to decide which one is best, but that's it. We have Scratch Refactoring (Michael Feather Working with legacy code), where we simulate changes by actually doing them in some code branch that we don't plan to deliver to production, just to learn how it goes, and that's valuable.

Note that as opposed to market which we have no way to influence, a codebase can have limitations which may prevent some requirements to be implemented at all. Let's consider a scenario in e-commerce: "Replace fixed discount rates by a rates grid for every kind of sales". We would ask our IDE to count for the number of references to the discount features throughout the codebase. If the number is in the hundreds or thousands, and without proper refactoring tools available for that kind of change, we would conclude that this scenario is too expensive, in other words impossible.

<h2 id="gmail-metrics">Metrics</h2>

Given a financial portfolio, asset managers and their tools calculate various metrics, e.g. the total amount under management, and the total exposition to a specific currency or to a particular company at risk.

In a codebase, we would also measure the total number of lines of code. If we have multiple languages including some legacy languages, we would measure the total number of lines of code in Power Builder to make sure it does not increase. We may also measure the size of various modules doing particular functionalities, but that's pretty much all we have.

Asset managers go much further. In addition to measuring what we have right now, they also measure the variation for any particular change of the market.

For example, the metrics called "sensitivity" measures how the price evolves when the interest rates move by 1%. The metrics called "beta" does the same when the market moves. The metrics called "convexity" measures how much the sensitivity changes when the interest rates move... From a mathematical perspective, the sensitivity is the first derivative of the price function, and convexity is the second derivative. They are often calculated by simulating the change and finding out the impact, as in a micro-stress test.

Sophisticated asset managers can measure such metrics for thousands of risk factors.

As far as I know in software we totally lack such capabilities.

<h1 id="gmail-hedging">Hedging</h1>

When asset managers don’t want to live with some type of risk, they apply specific investment techniques to reduce or cancel this particular risk; we say they "hedge" against this particular risk.

By the way every asset manager knows that if you hedge against all risks you get no return either. Conversely, higher risks usually go with higher returns, as described by the theory of the "risk-return spectrum" (<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Risk%E2%80%93return_spectrum">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Risk%E2%80%93return_spectrum</a>).

As developers we may be happy to go risky in the early stages of a startup. Then once the business model becomes well known, we prefer to reduce the risk of having to change the code too much when the requirements change. In financial words we want to reduce the sensitivity of the code to all volatile items of the requirements.

So we refactor to keep the code as simple as possible. We apply design heuristics like the SOLID principles. We apply refactorings to reduce the coupling to the requirements.

Asset managers do something similar. For example they would replace a specific instrument like a stock by a more diverse index. By doing so the portfolio remains exposed to the equity market, but no more from the specific risk of this single stock. The idea is to replace a coupling to the specific by a coupling to an average. That's a good idea in design too.

They would replace a primitive instrument (stock, bond) by an equivalent derivative instrument or by an equivalent composition of very common derivatives, in a way that makes it easier to change it later.

I could expand this list, but that's not the point for now. A software design similar example would be replacing IF statements by a Strategy or State design pattern. Same behaviour, different structure, and perhaps easier to extend later. This last example opens more options for further changes that we consider more likely than other.

<h1 id="gmail-options">Options</h1>

Options (financial options and real options) could deserve a full article just for them. An option is the possibility, but not the obligation, to do something in the future. In finance and in asset management, options are all about volatility. We measure volatility from the price of options, and we control our volatility by introducing options. And options almost always have a cost, free options are rare!

In modern software development, we introduce options by keeping our code as simple as possible, which makes it easy to change. We cover the codebase with plenty of automated tests, which makes it easy to make changes without fear. These two practices are by far the biggest options we live by.

When we introduce a design pattern, we add an explicit option to make specific changes later. When we refactor to the Strategy pattern, we explicitly bet that we may need to add additional concrete strategies behaviors later, and we pay the price through additional complexity. The key is to be aware of the cost and the probability of benefiting from the option.

A key quality in software design that is similar to the sensitivity mentioned before is what I'd call "progressiveness" of the code. It defines how easy it is to implement an arbitrary change of requirement in the code.

For example, your code with IF statements can easily accommodate a very little change of behaviour just by adding another IF statement. Or not. Let's quickly consider example:

<ul>
    <li>Changing a parameter stored in a property file? Easy, as long as tests can make sure there are no unexpected impacts somewhere else</li>
    <li>Change of persistence framework? Probably a breaking change, unless you applied Hexagonal Architecture.</li>
    <li>Change of push vs pull style of consuming data out of an external provider? This will break a part of your code even if you applied the Hexagonal Architecture!</li>
</ul>

Note that refactoring tools totally change the picture, by making expensive changes suddenly much cheaper. Renaming this class? It's prohibitively expensive, unless your refactoring tools make it totally free! This is why tools like Atomist can change this progressiveness a lot.

<h1 id="gmail-other-consideration-in-closing">Other consideration, in closing</h1>

Software design and asset management have a lot in common, the former being a case of the later. I hope it's obvious by now. Let's conclude with two more aspects.

<h2 id="gmail-in-the-long-run-it-s-all-defined-by-crises">In the long run, it's all defined by crises</h2>

I've heard that history in finance shows that exceptional events (crash, crises...) have more impact than anything else on portfolios and the companies around.

Yet, this level of unknown is so unknown that everybody ignores it and still optimizes for the routine, and gets surprised when major changes happen. remember the last company merger and how the information systems of different companies had to be connected together in some brutal and less than ideal way?

In case of crisis, in asset management just like in software, you’re on your own to react, the tooling does not help much and any sophistication gets on your way.

<h2 id="gmail-active-vs-passive-investment-styles">Active vs passive investment styles</h2>

In finance, indexes like the CAC40, the Dow Jones or the EURIBOR are standards that represent an average behaviour of some subset of the market.

In software we have standard interfaces, standard MIME types and formats (e.g. the standard .ics attached files for exchanging calendar events by email), and possibly patterns as a similar representation of average practices.

Serious research repeatedly shows that passive management (don't be original, just follow the index, i.e. what the industry is doing as a whole) always beats active management in the long run. Yet many people still believe (and make believe for their own interest) that they can outperform the markets. Does it resemble anything we do in software design?
